README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/clarity-logo.svg" alt="Clarity" width="480">
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>A programming language designed for LLM code generation.</strong>
</p>

---

Clarity is a statically typed, compiled language that optimizes for what matters when an LLM writes code: **correctness on first generation**. It compiles to WebAssembly.

```
module Example

function fibonacci(n: Int64) -> Int64 {
  match n <= 1 {
    True -> n,
    False -> {
      let a = fibonacci(n - 1);
      let b = fibonacci(n - 2);
      a + b
    }
  }
}
```

```bash
$ clarityc compile fibonacci.clarity
Compiled fibonacci.clarity -> fibonacci.wasm (116 bytes)

$ clarityc run fibonacci.clarity -f fibonacci -a 10
55
```

---

## Why Clarity?

Every mainstream language was designed for **humans** to write. Clarity is designed for **LLMs** to write.

When an LLM generates Python, JavaScript, or Java, it must choose between dozens of ways to express the same logic — and every choice is a chance to introduce a bug. Clarity eliminates these choices.

### The problem with existing languages

| Issue | Python | JavaScript | Java | Clarity |
|-------|--------|-----------|------|---------|
| Ways to write a conditional | `if`, `elif`, ternary, `match` | `if`, `switch`, ternary, `??` | `if`, `switch`, ternary | `match` (one way) |
| Null/undefined handling | `None` + crashes | `null` + `undefined` + crashes | `null` + NullPointerException | No null. `Option<T>` enforced at compile time |
| Error handling | Exceptions (easy to forget) | Exceptions + callbacks + Promise rejection | Checked + unchecked exceptions | Union types. Compiler enforces handling |
| Side effects | Invisible | Invisible | Invisible | Declared in function signature, compiler-enforced |
| Type coercion | `"5" + 3 = "53"` | `"5" + 3 = "53"` | String concat rules | No implicit conversions. Compile error |
| Mutable state | Default | Default | Default | Immutable by default |

### What this means for LLM-generated code

**Fewer tokens generated** — Clarity is more compact than Java and has less boilerplate than Python. Fewer tokens = lower cost per generation, lower latency, and fewer chances to hallucinate.

**Higher first-pass accuracy** — One syntax for branching (`match`), mandatory exhaustiveness checking, no null, no forgotten error handling. The compiler catches what the LLM gets wrong.

**Faster feedback loops** — Compilation is near-instant. The LLM generates code, the compiler validates it in milliseconds, and errors are specific and actionable ("missing pattern for variant `Failure`" rather than a runtime stack trace).

**Deterministic behavior** — No implicit conversions, no hidden state, no undefined behavior. What the LLM writes is what runs.

---

## Language Overview

### Types
```
// Built-in: Int64, Float64, String, Bool, Bytes, Unit

// Record types
type User = {
  id: Int64,
  email: String,
  active: Bool,
}

// Union types (tagged unions)
type Result =
  | Ok(value: Int64)
  | Error(reason: String)

// Generics (on types and functions)
type Wrapper<T> = { value: T }
function identity<T>(x: T) -> T { x }
```

### Functions
```
// Pure function — no side effects allowed
function square(n: Int64) -> Int64 {
  n * n
}

// Effectful function — side effects declared explicitly
effect[DB, Log] function save_user(name: String, email: String) -> Int64 {
  // The compiler ensures:
  // - This function CAN access DB and Log
  // - Pure functions CANNOT call this function
  // - Callers must declare at least [DB, Log] in their effects
  42
}
```

### Pattern Matching (the only control flow)
```
// Boolean branching
function abs(n: Int64) -> Int64 {
  match n >= 0 {
    True -> n,
    False -> 0 - n
  }
}

// Union type destructuring — compiler enforces all variants are handled
function describe(r: Result) -> String {
  match r {
    Ok(value) -> "success",
    Error(reason) -> reason
  }
}
// Forgetting a variant = compile error
```

### Immutable by Default
```
let x = 42;         // immutable
let mut y = 0;       // explicitly mutable
y = y + 1;           // reassignment allowed for let mut
```

### No Null, No Exceptions
```
// Instead of null → Option type
// Instead of exceptions → union types with error variants

type FetchResult =
  | Data(payload: String)
  | NotFound
  | NetworkError(message: String)

// The compiler forces you to handle ALL cases
function handle(r: FetchResult) -> String {
  match r {
    Data(payload) -> payload,
    NotFound -> "not found",
    NetworkError(message) -> message
  }
}
```

---

## Effect System

Clarity tracks side effects at compile time. A pure function cannot call an effectful one:

```
effect[DB] function read_user(id: Int64) -> String { ... }

// COMPILE ERROR:
// Function requires effects [DB] but caller only declares [none]
// help: Add the missing effects: effect[DB]
function bad() -> String {
  read_user(1)
}

// OK:
effect[DB] function good() -> String {
  read_user(1)
}
```

Available effects: `DB`, `Network`, `Time`, `Random`, `Log`, `FileSystem`, `Test`

---

## Error Messages Designed for LLMs

When an LLM accidentally uses a construct from another language, Clarity tells it exactly what to do instead:

```
error: Clarity does not have 'if' expressions
  --> app.clarity:5:3
   = help: Use 'match' for conditional logic:
           match condition { True -> ..., False -> ... }

error: Clarity does not have 'return'
  --> app.clarity:8:3
   = help: The last expression in a block is the return value

error: Clarity does not have 'null'
  --> app.clarity:3:12
   = help: Use Option type: Some(value) or None

error: Clarity does not have exceptions ('try')
  --> app.clarity:10:3
   = help: Use Result type: Ok(value) or Error(reason)
```

These messages are concise, actionable, and optimized for LLM self-correction.

---

## Self-Healing Test System

Clarity includes a built-in test framework designed for LLM self-correction. Write tests inline with your code using `effect[Test]` functions:

```
module Math

function add(a: Int64, b: Int64) -> Int64 { a + b }

effect[Test] function test_add() -> Unit {
  assert_eq(add(2, 3), 5);
  assert_eq(add(0, 0), 0);
  assert_eq(add(-1, 1), 0)
}
```

```bash
$ clarityc test math.clarity
[PASS] test_add (3 assertions)

1 tests, 1 passed, 0 failed
```

When tests fail, the output is structured for LLM consumption:

```
[FAIL] test_broken
  assertion_failed: assert_eq
  actual: -1
  expected: 5
  function: test_broken
  fix_hint: "Expected Int64 value 5 but got -1. Check arithmetic logic and edge cases."
```

The `--json` flag outputs machine-parseable JSON, enabling a **compile → test → fix** self-healing loop where the LLM reads structured failures, modifies the code, and re-runs until all tests pass.

Available assertions: `assert_eq` (Int64), `assert_eq_float` (Float64), `assert_eq_string` (String), `assert_true` (Bool), `assert_false` (Bool). All require `effect[Test]`.

---

## Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/clarity-llm-lang/clarity.git
cd clarity
npm install
```

### Compile a `.clarity` file
```bash
npx clarityc compile myfile.clarity
```

### Compile and run
```bash
npx clarityc run myfile.clarity -f function_name -a arg1 arg2
```

### Run inline tests (self-healing test runner)
```bash
npx clarityc test myfile.clarity            # run test functions
npx clarityc test myfile.clarity --json      # machine-readable output
npx clarityc test myfile.clarity --fail-fast  # stop on first failure
```

### Introspect language capabilities (for LLM consumption)
```bash
npx clarityc introspect              # full JSON: builtins, effects, types
npx clarityc introspect --builtins   # built-in functions with signatures and docs
npx clarityc introspect --effects    # effects with their function lists
npx clarityc introspect --types      # built-in types
```

### Other commands
```bash
npx clarityc compile myfile.clarity --check-only   # type-check only
npx clarityc compile myfile.clarity --emit-wat      # show WASM text format
npx clarityc compile myfile.clarity --emit-ast      # show AST as JSON
```

### Run compiler tests
```bash
npm test    # 187 tests across lexer, parser, type checker, and end-to-end
```

---

## Using Clarity with LLMs

### With Claude Code
Add to your project's `CLAUDE.md`:
```
Write all application code in the Clarity language.
Language spec: /path/to/clarity/docs/language-spec.md
Compile: npx tsx /path/to/clarity/src/index.ts compile <file>
```

Then just describe what you want. Claude will write Clarity.

### With any LLM
Include the [quick reference](docs/clarity-quickref.md) in your system prompt or context, then ask the LLM to generate Clarity code. The quickref is ~100 lines and designed for minimal token usage. For the full formal spec, see [language-spec.md](docs/language-spec.md).

### Extending Clarity (for LLMs)
Clarity is designed to be extended by LLMs. The `introspect` command lets any LLM discover current capabilities as JSON, and the [contributor protocol in CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md#extending-the-compiler) describes how to add new built-in functions (2-file edit) or new effects. All built-in functions and effects are defined in a single registry (`src/registry/builtins-registry.ts`).

---

## Compilation Target

Clarity compiles to **WebAssembly (WASM)** — a portable, sandboxed binary format that runs:

- In **Node.js** (built-in `WebAssembly` API)
- In **any browser** (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge)
- In **standalone runtimes** (Wasmtime, Wasmer, WasmEdge)
- On **edge platforms** (Cloudflare Workers, Fastly Compute)

Compiled output is small. The fibonacci example compiles to **116 bytes**.

---

## Project Structure

```
clarity/
├── src/
│   ├── index.ts            # CLI entry point
│   ├── compiler.ts         # Pipeline: lex → parse → check → codegen
│   ├── lexer/              # Tokenizer
│   ├── parser/             # Recursive descent + Pratt parser
│   ├── checker/            # Type checker, effect system, exhaustiveness
│   ├── registry/           # Built-in function & effect registry (single source of truth)
│   ├── codegen/            # WASM code generation via binaryen
│   └── errors/             # Diagnostics and error formatting
├── docs/
│   ├── language-spec.md    # Full language specification
│   └── grammar.peg         # Formal PEG grammar
├── examples/               # Example Clarity programs
└── tests/                  # 187 tests
```

---

## Current Status (v0.2)

**Working:**
- Int64 and Float64 arithmetic (including Float64 modulo)
- Boolean logic and comparisons
- Pattern matching on booleans and union types
- Exhaustiveness checking
- Let bindings (immutable and mutable) with reassignment for `let mut`
- Blocks with multiple statements
- Recursive function calls
- Effect system with compile-time enforcement
- Record types — declaration, construction, field access
- Union types — constructors, pattern matching, destructuring
- Option<T> as built-in (Some/None with correct polymorphism)
- Result<T, E> as built-in (Ok/Err with polymorphic type inference)
- Transparent type aliases (`type UserId = Int64`)
- List literals, length, head, tail, append, concat, reverse, is_empty, nth
- String literals, concatenation, equality, length, substring, char_at, contains, index_of, trim, split
- Named argument validation and reordering
- Type conversions (int_to_float, float_to_int, int_to_string, etc.)
- Math builtins (abs_int, min_int, max_int, sqrt, pow, floor, ceil)
- Built-in functions (print, logging) via host runtime
- I/O primitives: `read_line`, `read_all_stdin`, `read_file`, `write_file`, `get_args`, `exit`
- Higher-order functions (pass named functions as arguments, function type syntax)
- Parametric polymorphism / generics on functions and types (`function identity<T>(x: T) -> T`)
- Properly typed generic list builtins (`head : List<T> -> T`, `tail : List<T> -> List<T>`, etc.)
- Tail call optimization (self-recursive functions compiled to loops)
- Self-healing test system (assert_eq, assert_true, etc. with structured LLM-friendly output)
- WASM compilation and execution
- LLM-friendly error messages with migration hints

---

## Roadmap

Development follows a phased approach. Each phase builds on the previous one.

### Phase 1 — Correctness & Soundness (v0.2) -- DONE
Fix correctness bugs in the type system and codegen so that existing features actually work reliably.
- AST carries resolved types from the checker into codegen (no duplicate type inference)
- Option<T> polymorphism fixed (Option<Int64> and Option<String> coexist)
- Record literal type matching uses declared type names
- Float64 modulo operator
- string_to_int / string_to_float return proper Option-tagged values

### Phase 1.5 — I/O Primitives (v0.2.1) -- DONE
Make Clarity usable for real CLI programs.
- stdin/stdout: `read_line()`, `read_all_stdin()`
- File I/O: `read_file(path)`, `write_file(path, content)`
- Command-line arguments: `get_args() -> List<String>`
- Process control: `exit(code)`

### Phase 2 — Type System Foundations (v0.3)
Make the type system robust enough for real programs.
- ~~Parametric polymorphism / generics~~ (done — `function identity<T>(x: T) -> T` with monomorphization)
- ~~Properly typed list builtins~~ (done — `head : List<T> -> T`, `tail : List<T> -> List<T>`, etc.)
- ~~Built-in `Result<T, E>` type~~ (done — `Ok`/`Err` constructors with polymorphic type inference)
- ~~Type aliases~~ (done — transparent: `type UserId = Int64`)
- ~~Higher-order functions~~ (done — named functions as values via `(T) -> U` type syntax and `call_indirect`)
- ~~Mutable binding reassignment~~ (done — `let mut x = 1; x = x + 1` works)

### Phase 3 — Module System (v0.4)
Support programs larger than a single file.
- Import/export syntax
- File-based module resolution
- Standard library (`std.string`, `std.math`, `std.list`)

### Phase 4 — Runtime & Performance (v0.5)
Make programs viable for real workloads.
- Memory management (arena, refcounting, or WASM GC)
- ~~Tail call optimization~~ (done — self-recursive tail calls converted to loops)
- String interning

### Phase 5 — Language Completeness (v0.6+)
- Pattern guards and range patterns
- ~~Named argument semantic checking~~ (done — named args validated and reordered)
- Bytes and Timestamp runtime support
- REPL / browser playground

---

## License

MIT

Commit message:

feat: Fix pattern guard multi-arm bug and implement range patterns
Fix binaryen expression ref sharing bug in union match codegen that
caused miscompilation when pattern guards were combined with multiple
arms (e.g., guarded Success arm followed by Failure arm). The fix uses
a result local to avoid violating binaryen's tree invariant.

Add range patterns (1..10) for Int64 match expressions with inclusive
bounds. Ranges work with pattern guards and in TCO contexts.

196 tests passing.

https://claude.ai/code/session_01AyrPCoa99yYwGgi5HqmNBf

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/clarity-logo.svg" alt="Clarity" width="480">
</p>

<p align="center">
  <strong>A programming language designed for LLM code generation.</strong>
</p>

---

Clarity is a statically typed, compiled language that optimizes for what matters when an LLM writes code: **correctness on first generation**. It compiles to WebAssembly.

```
module Example

function fibonacci(n: Int64) -> Int64 {
  match n <= 1 {
    True -> n,
    False -> {
      let a = fibonacci(n - 1);
      let b = fibonacci(n - 2);
      a + b
    }
  }
}
```

```bash
$ clarityc compile fibonacci.clarity
Compiled fibonacci.clarity -> fibonacci.wasm (116 bytes)

$ clarityc run fibonacci.clarity -f fibonacci -a 10
55
```

---

## Why Clarity?

Every mainstream language was designed for **humans** to write. Clarity is designed for **LLMs** to write.

When an LLM generates Python, JavaScript, or Java, it must choose between dozens of ways to express the same logic — and every choice is a chance to introduce a bug. Clarity eliminates these choices.

### The problem with existing languages

| Issue | Python | JavaScript | Java | Clarity |
|-------|--------|-----------|------|---------|
| Ways to write a conditional | `if`, `elif`, ternary, `match` | `if`, `switch`, ternary, `??` | `if`, `switch`, ternary | `match` (one way) |
| Null/undefined handling | `None` + crashes | `null` + `undefined` + crashes | `null` + NullPointerException | No null. `Option<T>` enforced at compile time |
| Error handling | Exceptions (easy to forget) | Exceptions + callbacks + Promise rejection | Checked + unchecked exceptions | Union types. Compiler enforces handling |
| Side effects | Invisible | Invisible | Invisible | Declared in function signature, compiler-enforced |
| Type coercion | `"5" + 3 = "53"` | `"5" + 3 = "53"` | String concat rules | No implicit conversions. Compile error |
| Mutable state | Default | Default | Default | Immutable by default |

### What this means for LLM-generated code

**Fewer tokens generated** — Clarity is more compact than Java and has less boilerplate than Python. Fewer tokens = lower cost per generation, lower latency, and fewer chances to hallucinate.

**Higher first-pass accuracy** — One syntax for branching (`match`), mandatory exhaustiveness checking, no null, no forgotten error handling. The compiler catches what the LLM gets wrong.

**Faster feedback loops** — Compilation is near-instant. The LLM generates code, the compiler validates it in milliseconds, and errors are specific and actionable ("missing pattern for variant `Failure`" rather than a runtime stack trace).

**Deterministic behavior** — No implicit conversions, no hidden state, no undefined behavior. What the LLM writes is what runs.

---

## Language Overview

### Types
```
// Built-in: Int64, Float64, String, Bool, Bytes, Unit

// Record types
type User = {
  id: Int64,
  email: String,
  active: Bool,
}

// Union types (tagged unions)
type Result =
  | Ok(value: Int64)
  | Error(reason: String)

// Generics (on types and functions)
type Wrapper<T> = { value: T }
function identity<T>(x: T) -> T { x }
```

### Functions
```
// Pure function — no side effects allowed
function square(n: Int64) -> Int64 {
  n * n
}

// Effectful function — side effects declared explicitly
effect[DB, Log] function save_user(name: String, email: String) -> Int64 {
  // The compiler ensures:
  // - This function CAN access DB and Log
  // - Pure functions CANNOT call this function
  // - Callers must declare at least [DB, Log] in their effects
  42
}
```

### Pattern Matching (the only control flow)
```
// Boolean branching
function abs(n: Int64) -> Int64 {
  match n >= 0 {
    True -> n,
    False -> 0 - n
  }
}

// Union type destructuring — compiler enforces all variants are handled
function describe(r: Result) -> String {
  match r {
    Ok(value) -> "success",
    Error(reason) -> reason
  }
}
// Forgetting a variant = compile error
```

### Immutable by Default
```
let x = 42;         // immutable
let mut y = 0;       // explicitly mutable
y = y + 1;           // reassignment allowed for let mut
```

### No Null, No Exceptions
```
// Instead of null → Option type
// Instead of exceptions → union types with error variants

type FetchResult =
  | Data(payload: String)
  | NotFound
  | NetworkError(message: String)

// The compiler forces you to handle ALL cases
function handle(r: FetchResult) -> String {
  match r {
    Data(payload) -> payload,
    NotFound -> "not found",
    NetworkError(message) -> message
  }
}
```

---

## Effect System

Clarity tracks side effects at compile time. A pure function cannot call an effectful one:

```
effect[DB] function read_user(id: Int64) -> String { ... }

// COMPILE ERROR:
// Function requires effects [DB] but caller only declares [none]
// help: Add the missing effects: effect[DB]
function bad() -> String {
  read_user(1)
}

// OK:
effect[DB] function good() -> String {
  read_user(1)
}
```

Available effects: `DB`, `Network`, `Time`, `Random`, `Log`, `FileSystem`, `Test`

---

## Error Messages Designed for LLMs

When an LLM accidentally uses a construct from another language, Clarity tells it exactly what to do instead:

```
error: Clarity does not have 'if' expressions
  --> app.clarity:5:3
   = help: Use 'match' for conditional logic:
           match condition { True -> ..., False -> ... }

error: Clarity does not have 'return'
  --> app.clarity:8:3
   = help: The last expression in a block is the return value

error: Clarity does not have 'null'
  --> app.clarity:3:12
   = help: Use Option type: Some(value) or None

error: Clarity does not have exceptions ('try')
  --> app.clarity:10:3
   = help: Use Result type: Ok(value) or Error(reason)
```

These messages are concise, actionable, and optimized for LLM self-correction.

---

## Self-Healing Test System

Clarity includes a built-in test framework designed for LLM self-correction. Write tests inline with your code using `effect[Test]` functions:

```
module Math

function add(a: Int64, b: Int64) -> Int64 { a + b }

effect[Test] function test_add() -> Unit {
  assert_eq(add(2, 3), 5);
  assert_eq(add(0, 0), 0);
  assert_eq(add(-1, 1), 0)
}
```

```bash
$ clarityc test math.clarity
[PASS] test_add (3 assertions)

1 tests, 1 passed, 0 failed
```

When tests fail, the output is structured for LLM consumption:

```
[FAIL] test_broken
  assertion_failed: assert_eq
  actual: -1
  expected: 5
  function: test_broken
  fix_hint: "Expected Int64 value 5 but got -1. Check arithmetic logic and edge cases."
```

The `--json` flag outputs machine-parseable JSON, enabling a **compile → test → fix** self-healing loop where the LLM reads structured failures, modifies the code, and re-runs until all tests pass.

Available assertions: `assert_eq` (Int64), `assert_eq_float` (Float64), `assert_eq_string` (String), `assert_true` (Bool), `assert_false` (Bool). All require `effect[Test]`.

---

## Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/clarity-llm-lang/clarity.git
cd clarity
npm install
```

### Compile a `.clarity` file
```bash
npx clarityc compile myfile.clarity
```

### Compile and run
```bash
npx clarityc run myfile.clarity -f function_name -a arg1 arg2
```

### Run inline tests (self-healing test runner)
```bash
npx clarityc test myfile.clarity            # run test functions
npx clarityc test myfile.clarity --json      # machine-readable output
npx clarityc test myfile.clarity --fail-fast  # stop on first failure
```

### Introspect language capabilities (for LLM consumption)
```bash
npx clarityc introspect              # full JSON: builtins, effects, types
npx clarityc introspect --builtins   # built-in functions with signatures and docs
npx clarityc introspect --effects    # effects with their function lists
npx clarityc introspect --types      # built-in types
```

### Other commands
```bash
npx clarityc compile myfile.clarity --check-only   # type-check only
npx clarityc compile myfile.clarity --emit-wat      # show WASM text format
npx clarityc compile myfile.clarity --emit-ast      # show AST as JSON
```

### Run compiler tests
```bash
npm test    # 196 tests across lexer, parser, type checker, and end-to-end
```

---

## Using Clarity with LLMs

### With Claude Code
Add to your project's `CLAUDE.md`:
```
Write all application code in the Clarity language.
Language spec: /path/to/clarity/docs/language-spec.md
Compile: npx tsx /path/to/clarity/src/index.ts compile <file>
```

Then just describe what you want. Claude will write Clarity.

### With any LLM
Include the [quick reference](docs/clarity-quickref.md) in your system prompt or context, then ask the LLM to generate Clarity code. The quickref is ~100 lines and designed for minimal token usage. For the full formal spec, see [language-spec.md](docs/language-spec.md).

### Extending Clarity (for LLMs)
Clarity is designed to be extended by LLMs. The `introspect` command lets any LLM discover current capabilities as JSON, and the [contributor protocol in CLAUDE.md](CLAUDE.md#extending-the-compiler) describes how to add new built-in functions (2-file edit) or new effects. All built-in functions and effects are defined in a single registry (`src/registry/builtins-registry.ts`).

---

## Compilation Target

Clarity compiles to **WebAssembly (WASM)** — a portable, sandboxed binary format that runs:

- In **Node.js** (built-in `WebAssembly` API)
- In **any browser** (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge)
- In **standalone runtimes** (Wasmtime, Wasmer, WasmEdge)
- On **edge platforms** (Cloudflare Workers, Fastly Compute)

Compiled output is small. The fibonacci example compiles to **116 bytes**.

---

## Project Structure

```
clarity/
├── src/
│   ├── index.ts            # CLI entry point
│   ├── compiler.ts         # Pipeline: lex → parse → check → codegen
│   ├── lexer/              # Tokenizer
│   ├── parser/             # Recursive descent + Pratt parser
│   ├── checker/            # Type checker, effect system, exhaustiveness
│   ├── registry/           # Built-in function & effect registry (single source of truth)
│   ├── codegen/            # WASM code generation via binaryen
│   └── errors/             # Diagnostics and error formatting
├── docs/
│   ├── language-spec.md    # Full language specification
│   └── grammar.peg         # Formal PEG grammar
├── examples/               # Example Clarity programs
└── tests/                  # 196 tests
```

---

## Current Status (v0.2)

**Working:**
- Int64 and Float64 arithmetic (including Float64 modulo)
- Boolean logic and comparisons
- Pattern matching on booleans and union types
- Exhaustiveness checking
- Let bindings (immutable and mutable) with reassignment for `let mut`
- Blocks with multiple statements
- Recursive function calls
- Effect system with compile-time enforcement
- Record types — declaration, construction, field access
- Union types — constructors, pattern matching, destructuring
- Option<T> as built-in (Some/None with correct polymorphism)
- Result<T, E> as built-in (Ok/Err with polymorphic type inference)
- Transparent type aliases (`type UserId = Int64`)
- List literals, length, head, tail, append, concat, reverse, is_empty, nth
- String literals, concatenation, equality, length, substring, char_at, contains, index_of, trim, split
- Named argument validation and reordering
- Type conversions (int_to_float, float_to_int, int_to_string, etc.)
- Math builtins (abs_int, min_int, max_int, sqrt, pow, floor, ceil)
- Built-in functions (print, logging) via host runtime
- I/O primitives: `read_line`, `read_all_stdin`, `read_file`, `write_file`, `get_args`, `exit`
- Higher-order functions (pass named functions as arguments, function type syntax)
- Parametric polymorphism / generics on functions and types (`function identity<T>(x: T) -> T`)
- Properly typed generic list builtins (`head : List<T> -> T`, `tail : List<T> -> List<T>`, etc.)
- Tail call optimization (self-recursive functions compiled to loops)
- Self-healing test system (assert_eq, assert_true, etc. with structured LLM-friendly output)
- WASM compilation and execution
- LLM-friendly error messages with migration hints

---

## Roadmap

Development follows a phased approach. Each phase builds on the previous one.

### Phase 1 — Correctness & Soundness (v0.2) -- DONE
Fix correctness bugs in the type system and codegen so that existing features actually work reliably.
- AST carries resolved types from the checker into codegen (no duplicate type inference)
- Option<T> polymorphism fixed (Option<Int64> and Option<String> coexist)
- Record literal type matching uses declared type names
- Float64 modulo operator
- string_to_int / string_to_float return proper Option-tagged values

### Phase 1.5 — I/O Primitives (v0.2.1) -- DONE
Make Clarity usable for real CLI programs.
- stdin/stdout: `read_line()`, `read_all_stdin()`
- File I/O: `read_file(path)`, `write_file(path, content)`
- Command-line arguments: `get_args() -> List<String>`
- Process control: `exit(code)`

### Phase 2 — Type System Foundations (v0.3)
Make the type system robust enough for real programs.
- ~~Parametric polymorphism / generics~~ (done — `function identity<T>(x: T) -> T` with monomorphization)
- ~~Properly typed list builtins~~ (done — `head : List<T> -> T`, `tail : List<T> -> List<T>`, etc.)
- ~~Built-in `Result<T, E>` type~~ (done — `Ok`/`Err` constructors with polymorphic type inference)
- ~~Type aliases~~ (done — transparent: `type UserId = Int64`)
- ~~Higher-order functions~~ (done — named functions as values via `(T) -> U` type syntax and `call_indirect`)
- ~~Mutable binding reassignment~~ (done — `let mut x = 1; x = x + 1` works)

### Phase 3 — Module System (v0.4)
Support programs larger than a single file.
- Import/export syntax
- File-based module resolution
- Standard library (`std.string`, `std.math`, `std.list`)

### Phase 4 — Runtime & Performance (v0.5)
Make programs viable for real workloads.
- Memory management (arena, refcounting, or WASM GC)
- ~~Tail call optimization~~ (done — self-recursive tail calls converted to loops)
- String interning

### Phase 5 — Language Completeness (v0.6+)
- ~~Pattern guards~~ (done — guards on wildcard, binding, literal, constructor, and range patterns)
- ~~Range patterns~~ (done — `1..10` inclusive ranges on Int64)
- ~~Named argument semantic checking~~ (done — named args validated and reordered)
- Bytes and Timestamp runtime support
- REPL / browser playground

---

## License

MIT
